Fetching LFW dataset...
X_min: 0.0 X_max: 1.0
X_train shape: (966, 1, 50, 37)
SimpleCNN(
  (conv1): Conv2d(1, 32, kernel_size=(3, 3), stride=(1, 1), padding=(1, 1))
  (conv2): Conv2d(32, 32, kernel_size=(3, 3), stride=(1, 1), padding=(1, 1))
  (relu): ReLU()
  (pool): MaxPool2d(kernel_size=2, stride=2, padding=0, dilation=1, ceil_mode=False)
  (fc1): Linear(in_features=3456, out_features=128, bias=True)
  (fc2): Linear(in_features=128, out_features=7, bias=True)
)
Epoch 1/30  loss: 1.7462
Epoch 5/30  loss: 1.0740
Epoch 10/30  loss: 0.3595
Epoch 15/30  loss: 0.1613
Epoch 20/30  loss: 0.0525
Epoch 25/30  loss: 0.0163
Epoch 30/30  loss: 0.0083

Test Accuracy: 0.8820

88.2% test accuracy vs 62.4% for PCA+Random Forest — a huge jump, why:

PCA is linear — it can only capture variance as straight-line 
combinations of pixel intensities. It has no concept of "edge," 
"eyebrow," or spatial relationships between neighbouring pixels; 
flattening the image into a vector throws that structure away before 
PCA even sees it.
Convolution preserves spatial locality — each 3×3 filter looks 
at a small neighbourhood of pixels and slides across the whole 
image, so the network can learn local patterns (edges, then 
combinations of edges into shapes) and where they occur relative 
to each other. That's structural information PCA never had access to.
The features and classifier are trained jointly, end-to-end, 
via backpropagation — the conv filters are optimised specifically 
to produce features that help this classification task, 
whereas PCA's components are optimised to explain variance 
generally, with no awareness of which variance actually matters 
for telling people apart.

loss dropped to 0.0083 by epoch 30 — that's very close to zero 
training loss, which is a classic sign of overfitting, especially 
on a small dataset (966 training images, only 7 classes).

is this a good result / would you trust it: training loss this 
low with a dataset this small suggests the model may be memorising 
rather than purely generalising — check with techniques 
like dropout, data augmentation, or a validation curve to see if 
test performance plateaus or degrades before training loss bottoms out.

Image:
CNN loss curve
Steep drop from epoch 1-10 — the network is rapidly learning the most 
obvious, easy-to-find patterns that separate the 7 classes 
(biggest gradient signal early on). Then it flattens and decays 
smoothly from ~epoch 12 onward, gradually squeezing out the last 
bit of error as it fine-tunes weights, eventually crawling down 
toward ~0.01 by epoch 30.

Small bump around epoch 21-22 — loss ticks up slightly before 
continuing down. This is just normal stochastic noise from 
mini-batch training — each epoch shuffles the data into different 
random batches (torch.randperm), so the exact gradient direction 
wiggles a bit batch to batch. It's not a bug, and Adam's adaptive 
step sizes generally recover from small bumps like this without issue, 
which is exactly what happened here — it dips right back down and 
keeps converging.

the smooth, monotonic-ish decline down to near-zero training loss, 
with no plateau, is the textbook picture of a model that's had free 
rein to fit the training set almost perfectly. Since you don't have a 
separate validation curve running alongside it, you can't see from 
this plot alone whether test performance would have kept improving or 
started degrading past epoch 30 — training longer help? loss curve 
alone doesn't tell me — 
I'd want a validation loss tracked in parallel to check for that 
divergence

Does the filter go over individual pixels or regions? Regions — that's the whole 
point of a convolution kernel. A 3×3 filter looks at a 3×3 block of pixels at once 
(9 values), multiplies each by a learned weight, sums them into one number, 
then slides over by one pixel and repeats. That highlighted amber square in the 
diagram is one such 3×3 region; it produces exactly one value in the feature map 
(the amber cell on the right). The filter slides across every possible position in 
the image, building up the full feature map one region at a time — never looking at 
a single isolated pixel in isolation.

Does the CNN involve backpropagation, or just updating weights? Both, and they're 
not separate things — they're two halves of the same step. Forward pass: input flows 
through conv → pool → conv → pool → dense → output, producing a prediction. Loss: compare 
prediction to the true label. Backpropagation: the chain rule is applied backward through 
every layer to compute how much each individual weight contributed to the error — this is 
what loss.backward() actually does in your code. Weight update: the optimizer (Adam) then 
nudges every weight slightly in the direction that reduces that error, using the gradients 
backprop just computed. So backprop is the calculation step, and weight-updating is the action 
taken using that calculation — you can't update weights meaningfully without backprop telling 
you which direction to move them.

What are dense layers and what do they do? "Dense" (also called fully-connected) means every 
input neuron connects to every output neuron, each with its own learned weight — unlike 
convolution, which only looks at small local regions. After the conv/pool layers extract 
spatial features and get flattened into one long vector, the dense layers take that whole 
vector as input and learn to combine features globally to make a final decision. In your 
architecture, Dense 128 learns to combine extracted features into a compressed representation, 
and Dense (7) maps that down to one score per identity class — the actual classification 
decision happens here, not in the conv layers.

What is the Adam optimiser and what does it do? Adam decides how to update each weight 
once backprop has computed the gradients. Instead of moving every weight by the same fixed 
step size, Adam keeps a running average of each weight's recent gradient history and adapts 
the step size per weight — parameters with consistently large gradients get smaller, more 
cautious steps, while ones with small or noisy gradients get relatively larger steps. This 
adaptivity is why Adam tends to converge quickly and reliably without much manual tuning, which 
is exactly why it was the natural choice for Part 3.1's fairly straightforward classification 
task (versus Part 3.2's DAWNBench challenge, where you deliberately used SGD instead, because 
it reaches a higher final accuracy ceiling on CNN vision tasks even though it needs more careful tuning).

Why introduce pooling at all? Three real reasons, not just "to make it smaller": 
(1) Computational efficiency — halving spatial dimensions after each pool dramatically 
cuts the number of computations needed in every following layer. 
(2) Controlling overfitting — fewer parameters downstream means less capacity to simply 
memorise training images. 
(3) Building spatial invariance — max-pooling keeps only the strongest activation 
in each small region, so the network becomes somewhat tolerant to a feature shifting 
by a pixel or two (an eye detected slightly left or right of where it was in training still 
triggers the same pooled response). Without pooling, the network would need 
vastly more parameters and be far more sensitive to exact pixel positioning.

What ReLU does: ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) is dead simple: 
f(x)=max(0,x) — if a value is positive, pass it through unchanged; if it's negative, set it to zero. 
It's applied after every conv layer and dense layer (except the very last one). Two reasons it matters:
1. Non-linearity. Without it, stacking conv layers would be mathematically equivalent to 
just one bigger linear layer — no matter how many layers you stack, a chain of purely linear 
operations collapses into a single linear operation. ReLU breaks that by introducing a non-linear "kink," 
which is what actually lets the network learn complex, curved decision boundaries rather than only 
straight-line separations between classes. This directly connects to the "linear decomposition" distinction 
from Part 2 — PCA is stuck being linear, and ReLU is precisely the ingredient that lets a CNN not be.
2. Sparsity/efficiency. Zeroing out negative activations means only some neurons "fire" for any 
given input, which tends to make learned features cleaner and more distinct, and it's computationally 
trivial compared to alternatives like sigmoid.